---
title: "Introduction"
date: 2020-02-10T22:12:06-08:00
lastmod: 2020-02-10T22:12:06-08:00
draft: false
url: /posts/2020/02/10/introduction
---

Hello. I am a software engineer from Portland hoping to spread some knowledge
when I have something possibly interesting to share.

This is a new thing for me, technical blogging, so it might take me a little
time to get started, but I hope I can start to churn out a regular stream of
meaningful content quickly.

## Why do this?

I have increasingly been feeling the pressure to start a technical blog.  I
tend to dig into weird, obscure issues fairly frequently, and have often
thought my notes could be of interest and/or help to others. But setting up a
blog and writing content takes time, and I just haven't been able to convince
myself to make it happen.

That was, until I was lucky enough to attend FOSDEM last weekend.  In a talk by
Claire Giordano called [Fibonacci Spirals and 21 Ways to Contribute to
Postgres—Beyond
Code](https://fosdem.org/2020/schedule/event/postgresql_fibonacci_spirals_and_21_ways_to_contribute_to_postgres_beyond_code/),
I became convinced it was time to start writing.  I've also wanted to
contribute more to open source, and Claire pointed out that _writing blogs is a
way to help open source!_ That is, documenting how to work with and use open
source software is just as important as making code contributions.

After all, what good is open code no one knows how to use, or even what it is
good for?

So here I am. Please, stay tuned. I have more content coming.
